Reliable Tags Using Image Similarity
Mining Specificity and Expertise from Large-Scale Multimedia Databases
Lyndon Kennedy

Malcolm Slaney

Kilian Weinberger

Yahoo! Research
Santa Clara, CA

Yahoo! Research
Santa Clara, CA

Yahoo! Research
Santa Clara, CA

lyndonk@yahoo-inc.com

malcolm@ieee.org

kilian@yahoo-inc.com

ABSTRACT
This paper describes an approach for finding image descriptors or tags that are highly reliable and specific. Reliable,
in this work, means that the tags are related to the image’s
visual content, which we verify by finding two or more real
people who agree that the tag is applicable. Our work differs from prior work by mining the photographer’s (or web
master’s) original words and seeking inter-subject agreement
for images that we judge to be highly similar. By using the
photographer’s words we gain specificity since the photographer knows that the image represents something specific,
such as the Augsburg Cathedral; whereas random people
from the web playing a labeling game might not have this
knowledge. We describe our approach and demonstrate that
we identify reliable tags with greater specificity than human
annotators.

australia, uluru, sunrise, honeymoon, sacred,
ayers, rock, katatjuta, nature, clouds, outback,
brush, orange, shrubs, desert, dry, thruhike98

uluru, sunrise, climb, beautiful, rock, ayers,
chain, Ayers Rock, Australia, geotagged

(a) Photos of Uluru (Ayers Rock) in Australia

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous

General Terms

ZenpukujiPark, Ogikubo,
CommonKingfisher, カワセミ

birdwatching, Guarda-Rios,
wildbird, CommonKingfisher

(b) Photos of Common Kingfishers

Algorithms, Human Factors

Keywords
tagging, reliability, specificity, image similarity

1.

Figure 1: Examples of visually similar images with
highly specific shared tags found automatically with
our proposed system. The specific tags are shown
in bold.

INTRODUCTION

As the volume of multimedia available on the web grows,
so does the need for tools for searching, organizing, and exploring this immense resource. A variety of research efforts
are currently showing great promise in a wide array of applications over this media, such as multimedia retrieval, automatic image and video annotation, and multimedia summarization.
A common aspect of many of these new systems for processing multimedia is that they rely heavily on the ability

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
WSMC’09, October 23, 2009, Beijing, China.
Copyright 2009 ACM 978-1-60558-761-5/09/10 ...$10.00.

to solicit reliable annotations for a large number of example
images. Methods for learning automatic classifiers for various visual objects rely on large sets of labeled images. Visual
image search can be greatly improved if images are assigned
reliable tags. Annotation presents a number of difficulties,
however. The provided labels are often noisy and unreliable.
Furthermore annotators may only have a cursory knowledge
of the visual objects in the images and may not be able to
provide any specific details.
A number of approaches have been proposed for increasing the reliability of image labels, ranging from utilizing the
input from multiple annotators in a game scenario [10] to
leveraging the tags of visually similar images to re-order or
re-weight the labels associated with a given image [6, 7]. In
this work, we propose a new framework for gathering reliable image labels that lies somewhere between these two
approaches. We leverage a large database of tagged photographs and discover pairs of visually similar images. We

Player 1

cathedral
building
vacation
tourism

Player 2

building
sky
bush

Photographer 1

Photographer 2

notre dame
paris
france
vacation

paris
france
cathedral
notre dame

Image
Similarity

(a) Interaction in the ESP Game

(b) Mining Tags from the Web

Figure 2: Tagging activity and interaction in (a) the ESP game and (b) our proposed web mining approach.
then make the assumption that, if there are one or more
matching tags entered by separate people on each of these
visually similar images, then those tags are likely to be related to the image content, and therefore reliable and useful
for applications like training visual models or search.
We conduct a study using a database of over 19 million
images collected from a photo sharing website. We find that
the method can significantly increase the relevance of the
tags associated with the images. We further find that photographers (the image creators) are more adept than random annotators at providing highly specific labels, meaning
that photographers tend to have a deeper knowledge of the
subjects of their photographs and can often provide useful
details, such as the model of a car or the exact species of a
bird. In Figure 11 , we see some examples of actual image
pairs that can be discovered with our proposed approach
and the types of highly specific tags that can be extracted
from them.
The primary contribution of this work is a framework
wherein tags provided by two photographers on two highlysimilar images can be leveraged to find highly specific and reliable textual annotations of the visual content of the image
that would otherwise be unknown to layperson annotators.
We demonstrate that our approach (and similar efforts) provide more specific tags than those found using human annotators in an ESP game.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the
next section, we will review techniques for providing reliable
image annotations and present our new approach. In Section
3, we will present the approach in depth and then evaluate
1
All images used in this paper are licensed under Creative
Commons. See Appendix A for a complete list of credits.

its performance on a large-scale image collection in Section
4. We review related work in Section 5 and give conclusions
and future work in Section 6.

2.

RELIABLE IMAGE ANNOTATION

In this section, we review two recent approaches that aim
to increase the reliability of labeling images and propose a
new hybrid approach that introduces a level of expertise and
specificity to the provided labels.

2.1

Games

The ESP game [10] is a system that uses a game between
two users to gather image annotations. The game relies on
the assumption that agreement between two independent
human annotators is sufficient for determining the reliability
of a given tag or annotation. In the game, two separate players are shown the same image and asked to type in terms for
objects that they see in the image. The players are awarded
points if they both enter matching terms. This game interface both entices users to participate in image labeling and
ensures that the collected annotations are accurate. A key
criticism of this approach is that the gathered annotations
will be somewhat shallow. For example, in an image containing a car, any two individual players should be able to
enter “car.” However, an expert might know the make and
model of the car and even the year in which it was made. In
the ESP game, there is little chance that this expertise will
be present in both players, and this highly specific, expert
knowledge will not make it into the set of trusted tags for
the image.

!"#$%&'()*+

!"#$"%&'("#
)*+,-.""%(#/

!"#$"%&'("#

2+34"5%-$3%+/&
'()*+

,+)%$-+
.+)-"+/
0'.%+-&16

.+)-"+/
0'.%+-&1

!"#$%$"&'"(')*+

Figure 3:
method.

2.2

Block diagram of feature extraction

Large-Scale Image Search

One can also leverage the vast amount of images that exist in social media sites (such as FlickrTM2 ), as a source of
labeled image sets for learning visual models and retrieval.
It has been discovered that the labels in these resources are
often very noisy and not necessarily reflective of the visual
content of the image. By some estimates, as few as only 50%
of images with a particular tag may actually contain visual
content related to that tag [5].
To address the noisiness inherent in tagged media, a number of recent efforts have undertaken an approach based on
query-by-example image search [6, 7]. These methods find
the set of nearest-neighbors for an image in a low-level visual feature space and then rank or weight the tags that are
applied to the image based on their frequency in the set of
nearest neighbors. The assumption is that, if many visually similar image share common tags with the query image,
then it is likely that the given tag is highly related to the
visual content of the image. If the image contains tags that
are not found amongst its nearest-neighbors, then, perhaps
those tags are not related to the visual content and should,
therefore, be de-emphasized. The efforts to evaluate systems
like these, however, have only focused on fairly common or
generic objects and tags, like “beach,”“boat,” and “flower.”

2.3

Proposed Approach

In this work, we propose a method for gathering reliably
tagged images that lies between the two game- and retrievalbased approaches that we discussed above. Our primary
insight is that the methods applied for retrieval-based tag
selection can be leveraged to fill in the problems in expertise
and specificity that are often found in the ESP game.
Specifically, photographs shared on Flickr are typically
tagged by the owner of the photograph, who is usually the
photographer who shot the photo. Therefore, the annotations found on Flickr are infused with a certain amount of
personal context. If the photograph is a landmark or location, the photographer has most likely been there and can
accurately name the exact spot at which he or she took the
photo. Similarly, if the photograph is of a flower, bird, car,
or anything else, the photographer has most likely had a
first-hand encounter with that object. Since he or she finds
the subject worthy of photographing, the photographer may
also have a deeper knowledge of the subject. What all of
this amounts to is that photographers are often more likely
to be able to identify the specifics of the subjects that they
photograph than random annotators. The experience of taking and sharing photographs endows the photographer with
some expertise about the subjects of the photographs.
2

http://flickr.com

Our proposal, then, is to examine image pairs that have
high visual similarity in low-level feature space. When such
pairs are found, it is similar to a case where both photographers are playing the ESP game with each other, only they
are annotating slightly different versions of highly similar images. We propose that when separate authors provide identical tags for visually similar images, it is highly likely that
these tags are related to the visual content of the images.
We further hypothesize that these authors will be able to
provide much more specific labels than other labelers, since
they have a deeper personal context for the photograph at
hand. In Figure 2, we show the similarities and differences
between our approach and the ESP game.

3.

ALGORITHM AND ANALYSIS

We have implemented an algorithm for finding reliable
tags by finding identical images taken by two or more different photographers. In this section we describe the algorithm,
the image-similarity feature, the calculations we performed
for this paper, and the data we used to evaluate the quality
of the selected tags.

3.1

Algorithm

Given a set of images, we apply a time-shifted version the
ESP game. We look for image pairs that are: (1) highly
similar in feature space, (2) posted by different authors, and
(3) share a common tag. It is important to look for different
authors because people tend to apply the same tags to many
different photos (i.e. all photos from a photographer’s trip
to Tokyo are labeled with “tokyo.” This approach is a timeshifting of the tag decision. Two photographers at different
times have taken the same photo and labeled it with the
same tag.
To find a set of candidate nearest-neighbor pairs for this
paper, we took images in our data set and issued each as
a query against the full image database. We exhaustively
calculate the Euclidean distance between the query image
and each image in the database to find its 20 nearest neighbors. We have implemented this approach on a large grid of
computers using a Map/Reduce framework [3] and we can
process thousands of query images per minute. Algorithms
such as locality-sensitive hashing could also be used to speed
up the search [8].

3.2

Features

The measure of image similarity can be based on many different kinds of features. In this work we use a low-dimensional
feature based on a convolutional neural network.
For each image in the database, we extract a set of lowlevel features to encapsulate and represent the image content. The features, themselves, are learned from hundreds
of thousands of web images utilizing a feed-forward network
over a series of simple filters. The parameters of the network are learned to provide optimal reconstruction of images from the resulting network outputs. In the end, we are
left with a 1,024-dimensional feature vector for each image,
which encapsulates some aspects of the distributions of colors and textures throughout the image. Figure 3 shows a
block diagram of this approach. More details are available
elsewhere [4].

Precision @ 10

Tag-Only Baseline

Nearest-Neighbor Pruning

6

10

1.00
0.75

5

10

0.50
0.25

4

10

Figure 4: Precision of user-supplied tags versus reliable tags as found using the algorithm in this paper

Frequency

e
ag
av
er

n

er

ai

tig

nt

g

er
w
m

ou

flo

do

ca
r

ge
id
br

e

at
bo

cy
cl
bi

ne
la

be

rp
ai

ac
h

0

3

10

2

10

1

We note that our proposed approach is not reliant on these
specific features. Indeed, any combination of features that
yield a reasonable measure of image similarity should be
sufficient.

3.3

10

0

10
0
10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

5

10

6

10

Rank

Experimental Data and Features

We test our proposed method on a subset of images extracted from Flickr. The set contains every publicly available photograph posted by a random sampling of 104,670
users. This totals to over 19.6 million images. In addition
to the images themselves, we also gather other pieces of information around the image, such as the list of tags that have
been associated with the image and the identity its owner.
We normalize the tags to remove capitalization and spacing
such that “Golden Gate Bridge” and “goldengatebridge” are
equivalent.
For this paper we used 1 million images as queries against
the full database. In our data set, roughly 7% of the query
images have a neighbor that meets all of the criteria mentioned in Section 3.1. Many of these images have several
such neighbors, so in total, we find more than 160,000 visually similar image pairs with matching annotations from
different authors.

We conduct this evaluation over our collection of images
using the 10 query terms evaluated by Li et al. [6]. The
results of the evaluation are shown in Figure 4. For each
query term, we calculate the precision of the top-ten returned results (the percentage of the top-ten results that are
actually relevant). We see consistent improvement in search
relevance across all of the search terms and a 37% average
relative increase in precision. Even the false-positive images returned by our system are understandable. Many images tagged with “airplane” or “boat” were not photographs
of airplanes or boats, but in fact photographs of the view
taken from airplanes or boats. Similarly, many of the images tagged with “tiger” were actually of sports teams named
“Tigers.”

4.

4.2

EVALUATION

We evaluated our approach to find reliable tags using three
different tests. We first measured the precision of the original (photographer-specified) tags versus the precision of our
reliable tags. Then we describe the specificity of the tags
and categorize the types of images for which we find specific
tags. Finally, we compare the specificity of the tags found
algorithmically by our proposed method against those provided by random annotators in and ESP-like scenario.

4.1

Precision of Discovered Terms

A first question to ask with a set of visually similar images with shared tags is: are these tags, indeed, accurate?
Other works in this area [6, 7] have conducted evaluations
on the precision of re-ordered or re-weighted tags by applying them in image search scenarios. In a baseline approach,
we conduct a search for a term and gather a random set
of images tagged with that term. To evaluate the relative
improvement in tagging accuracy provided by our proposed
approach, we conduct an additional search where we constrain the set of returned images to be only those that are
both tagged with the search term and also have a nearestneighbor that is also tagged with the search term, effectively
limiting the search set to only those images for which we are
most certain of the accuracy of the tag.

Figure 5: Tag frequency versus rank.

Specificity of Annotations

Having seen that the tags shared between visually similar
images are sufficiently accurate, we move on to evaluate the
level of specificity in the tags that we have discovered. Specificity is difficult to measure. In this study, we simply use the
frequency of terms in the overall database as a proxy for estimating their specificity. The intuition is that less-frequent
terms contain more information than more-frequent ones:
that “San Francisco” is more specific than “California” and
that “Golden Gate Bridge” is even more specific. Rareness,
of course, is an imperfect measure of specificity. We might
also consider employing structured knowledgebases, such as
WordNet [2], to directly encode specific / general relationships between terms; however, in systems like Flickr, where
users employ a large vocabulary, which is often divergent
with standard English, frequency might still be the best
measure available.
Our collection of images contains roughly 2.6 tags per image and more than 1 million unique tags. Figure 5 shows the
frequency of each tag compared to its rank and shows something similar to a power law distribution, which is typically
expected.
To begin our investigation of the quality of specific tags
discovered by our method, we sort the pairs of images by
the frequency of the least-frequent tag that the two share

haight street

trevi fountain

Frequency in Tagging

Locations

chion-in temple

Proposed Algorithm
0.45
0.30
0.15
0
100

Models

Animals

Plants

More Specific

passion flower

cornflower

california poppy

donkey

cranefly

bald eagle

boeing 777

opel gt

at-at

Figure 6: Examples of categories of discoverable infrequent tags. Each shown image is found automatically by our system.

and inspect the image pairs discovered that share the leastfrequent tags. Upon inspecting this set, we find that these
specific tags fall into four primary categories:
• Locations and Landmarks account for more than 50%
of the discovered pairs with infrequent tags. These include specific city names as well as specific sites, such as
“san francisco” and “coit tower.”
• Plant-life photographs account for approximately 25%
of the discovered pairs. These are often photographs of
flowers with correct names attached, such as “dahlia” or
“orchid.”
• Animal-life accounts for about 10% of the discovered
pairs and includes specific species of insects and animals,
such as “crane fly” and “common kingfisher.”
• Makes and Models include tags related to specific
products, such as “audi a3” and “zune.” These are found
in about 15% our examples.
Examples of each of these specific tag categories can be
found in Figure 6.

4.3

Human vs. Algorithmic Specificity

To further evaluate the level of specificity of the tags that
we have discovered, we compared the specificity of human
and machine-generated tags. We conducted a simulation of
the ESP game using some of these specifically-tagged image
pairs. We select 100 image pairs, all with rare shared tags,
where rare is defined as tags that occur in less than 0.005% of
the images in our database. These contain locations, plants,
animals, and makes/models in roughly the same proportions

ESP Simulation

0.60

101

102

103

Overall Tag Frequency

104

105
Less Specific

Figure 7: Distribution of specificity of tags provided
by human annotators in an ESP game simulation
versus the tags provided by photographers and discovered algorithmically by our approach. Less specific tags, those with high-frequency on the right of
the graph, are used more often by human annotators
(in an ESP game), compared to the specific tags on
the left.

as discussed above. We remove some noisy pairs that were
found due to non-English tags, or tags related to web applications used to make certain types of images or collages.
We show one image from each pair to two subjects, both
of whom are native English speakers, residents of San Francisco, and unfamiliar with the hypotheses and methods that
we have employed in this work. The subjects are both shown
the same image from the pair and are asked to provide a set
of descriptive terms related to the image content, so they
are effectively asynchronously playing the ESP game.
In Figure 7, we show the distributions of the specificity
of the tags found algorithmically for the image pairs (the
tags provided by the photographers) and the tags provided
by the image annotators in our study. We see a stronger
tendency in the human annotators to provide generic tags
(those that are generally more frequently used), while the
algorithmically discovered tags were more specific, overall.
Further analysis of the study results are shown in Table 1.
For each image, each annotator provided, on average, around
3 tags. First, we counted how many times both annotators
had at least one tag in common. This was a fairly common
occurrence, with matches found on 78% of all the images,
which reinforces the utility of the ESP game in general: it
works and provides reasonable annotations. We then count
the number of times that the human annotators had at least
one specific tag in common. (Here, we counted any tags that
referred to specific locations, species of plant or animals, and
brands or models.) Specific matches occurred less frequently.
For animals and models, the human annotators had a reasonable degree of success, though many of these were due to
identifying the brand of a car where the logo was clearly
visible in the photograph or identifying somewhat common
animals, such as bees and donkeys. In no cases, however,
were the annotators able to identify the exact model of a
car. More-obscure animals, such as the common kingfisher
and the crane fly, also presented some difficulty.
The performance of the human annotators on the location
images was more mixed. They were able to identify a number of well-known locations and landmarks, like the Liberty
Bell and the Statue of Liberty. However, the annotators did
not have enough knowledge for some more obscure locations,
like the Harbour Bridge in Sydney or Monument Valley.
Plants were very difficult for the human annotators. These

Category
Locations
Plants
Animals
Models
Total

# Images
54
24
10
13
100

% Agreement
67%
92%
80%
92%
78%

% Specific
20%
4%
40%
46%
22%

Table 1: The quality of human-generated tags in an
ESP-like game on the 100 evaluated image pairs for
which this algorithm found highly specific reliable
tags. For each category, we show the total number of images annotated (# Images), the percentage
for which the two annotators provided a matching
tag (% Agreement), and the percentage of pairs for
which the annotators were able to provide highly
specific tags (% Specific).
tended to include a number of species of flowers. The annotators were able to correctly identify an orchid, but were
unable to identify marigolds, corn flowers, California poppies, or any other type of plant.
Interestingly, when the human annotators tried to provide some specific information, the tags that were entered
were often erroneous. For example, one annotator mistakenly identified a building by architect Frank Gehry to be by
Antoni Gaudi and entered the incorrect model of a particular Audi car. The other annotator misidentified a building
in Barcelona as being in Germany. And this actually, again,
emphasizes the power of the ESP game: such erroneous input would be ignored, since it is not confirmed by the other
player. However, these results also suggest that if the annotators are also the photographers and they have some degree
of expertise on the subject of their photographs (as is the
case on Flickr), then it is possible to mine some highly specific annotations from their shared photo collections. This
approach may exceed the capabilities of the standard ESP
game with respect to gathering annotations that are reliable
and specific.
Our proposed method, on the other hand, leverages the
personal context of the photographers who have actually
taken the photographs and is able to discover tags for images
that are often highly reliable and very specific.

5.

RELATED WORK

Aside from the works that we discussed in Section 2, there
are some other related works that have aimed to leverage
query-by-example image search over large collections of images to provide image annotations. Crandall et al. [1] and
Zheng et al. [11] have both proposed systems that work
over large collections of geo-referenced photographs. Given
a query image, the systems can find visually similar images
from the collection, identify the location at which the photograph was taken, and provide tags for the subject of the
photo. Torralba et al. [9] constructed a collection of 80 million images from the web image search results for every term
in WordNet. They then proposed to label unseen images by
finding their nearest neighbors in the search set and propagating the labels from those images to the query image.
These works are differentiated from our work in that they
seek to predict labels for untagged images, whereas we have
focused on mining knowledge from pairs of images that are
both labeled by human annotators.

6.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Tags are inherently a noisy, user-generated signal describing the content of an image. We wish to find words that
multiple people can agree apply to an image in hopes the
process will yield tags that are reliable and specific.
In this work, we demonstrated a novel way to generate
highly reliable tags that describe an image. Unlike the ESP
game which asks two random users to find a tag they agree
describes a photo, we look for highly similar images that
are described with the same term by two different photographers. The most important benefit of this approach is that
we often find highly specific tags, which give a greater level
of detail about the subjects of the images. This specificity
arises out of the photographers’ knowledge of the location of
the object, or its exact description. In addition, recruiting
new game players can be difficult and we get our tags from
the words that a photographer has already supplied.
In the experiment described here, we found reliable tags
for 1% of the images in our database. We tested the images
for which we found highly-specific tags using our algorithm
and found that only 22% of the same images were annotated
in an ESP game by humans with specific tags. Furthermore,
we saw a tendency for human annotators to provide moregeneric annotations than the photographers, who provided
highly-specific annotations. In addition, we found an average increase in the precision of the tags of 37%.
Our approach is efficient because we capitalize on the labels already provided by users. In many cases the photographer supplies the labels as part of a submission to a photosharing site. But we can also apply the same approach to
anchor text or other captions associated with a web page.
While we applied this approach to only 19 million images
or less than 1% of the publicly available images on Flickr,
the success of our approach will only grow as we expand the
database to cover more of the photos available on the web.
We do not expect to be able to find reliable tags with every
image—some images are too unique to ever find a match.
But with the wealth of photos on the web, we do not need
to label each image, just find good images that are tagged
with any particular word. Perhaps most importantly, our
approach is not limited to finding English tags.

7.

REFERENCES

[1] D. J. Crandall, L. Backstrom, D. Huttenlocher, and
J. Kleinberg. Mapping the world’s photos. In WWW
’09: Proceedings of the 18th international conference
on World wide web, pages 761–770, New York, NY,
USA, 2009. ACM.
[2] C. Fellbaum et al. WordNet: An electronic lexical
database. MIT press Cambridge, MA, 1998.
[3] Hadoop. http://hadoop.apache.org/core/.
[4] E. Hoerster, M. Slaney, M. Ranzato, and
K. Weinberger. Unsupervised image ranking. In
Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on Large-Scale
Multimedia Retrieval and Mining, Beijing, China,
October 2009.
[5] L. Kennedy, S.-F. Chang, and I. Kozintsev. To search
or to label?: predicting the performance of
search-based automatic image classifiers. Proceedings
of the 8th ACM international workshop on Multimedia
information retrieval, pages 249–258, 2006.
[6] X. Li, C. G. M. Snoek, and M. Worring. Learning tag

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

relevance by neighbor voting for social image retrieval.
In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference
on Multimedia Information Retrieval, pages 180–187,
Vancouver, Canada, October 2008.
D. Liu, X.-S. Hua, L. Yang, M. Wang, and H.-J.
Zhang. Tag ranking. In WWW ’09: Proceedings of the
18th international conference on World wide web,
pages 351–360, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
M. Slaney and M. Casey. Locality-sensitive hashing for
finding nearest neighbors [lecture notes]. Signal
Processing Magazine, IEEE, 25(2):128–131, 2008.
A. Torralba, R. Fergus, and W. T. Freeman. Tiny
images. Technical Report MIT-CSAIL-TR-2007-024,
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2007.
L. von Ahn and L. Dabbish. Labeling images with a
computer game. Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on Human factors in computing systems, pages
319–326, 2004.
Y. Zheng, M. Zhao, Y. Song, H. Adam,
U. Buddemeier, A. Bissacco, F. Brucher, T. Chua, and
H. Neven. Tour the World: building a web-scale
landmark recognition engine. In CVPR ’09:
Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE Computer Society
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2009.

APPENDIX
A.

PHOTO ATTRIBUTIONS

All photographs used in this paper are licensed under Creative Commons. Photographer credits are listed below.
Figure 1:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/hmorandell/130536654/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/thruhike98/248608444/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/jvverde/2298487209/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/16134053@N00/266023301/
Figure 2:
http://www.flickr.com/photos/redneck/2363234517/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/davidthibault/2449284848/
Figure 6:
Locations
http://www.flickr.com/photos/aranmanoth/350381473/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/plyn4lf/121479650/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/63269749@N00/2152878314/
Plants
http://www.flickr.com/photos/pdc/553336027/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/dickey/113608130/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/ericinsf/52601149/
Animals
http://www.flickr.com/photos/vickispix/225669748/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/96619357@N00/201296878/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/georgehoffman/168099747/
Models
http://www.flickr.com/photos/rduffy/164891469/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/volodimer/405241836/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/deep-resonance/484983237/

