MAHAK GARG
112 E. State St., Apt #3E, Ithaca, NY - 14850| Tel: +1(607)3795205|Email: mg2288@cornell.edu

EDUCATION
Cornell University, Ithaca (Aug 2016– May 2017)
Master of Engineering, Computer Science
4.0 GPA
 Worked as a Consultant for the Cornell law school’s elastic search based legal text search project.
 Coursework: Machine Learning, NLP, Operating Systems, Database Management Systems.
National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra (Jul 2006– June 2010)
Bachelor of Technology, Computer Science and Engineering
9.56/10 CGPA
 Industrial Training: Successfully completed 8 weeks training at Agilent Technologies, Gurgaon where I worked on creating the
company’s intranet website using JSP technology.
SKILLS
Java, C/C++, Python, Amazon Web services, Eclipse, MVC, Visual Studio, Xcode
ACADEMIC PROJECTS
Cornell University
 Working in a team of two on the open-source spatio-temporal database geomesa, to add support for using data in Hbase in Spark .
 Working in a team of six to create a web application which can help people choose conference papers based on their research
interests.
 As part of practicum designed a virtual minithread OS, which supports multiple threads with round robin multilevel scheduling,
TCP and UDP network communication and a Unix like file storage system.
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
Adobe Systems, Noida, India (Apr 2012 – July 2016)
Computer Scientist, Globalization and Text Analytics
 Led a team of three for a project that aimed at enabling Multi lingual search support in Adobe products like Stock, Behance
etc. using elastic search. Developed customized elastic search plugins to help aid the Multi lingual search.
 Created a Wiktionary-based lemmatizer solution in java for English, French and German languages to be used in the search.
 Implemented a de-compounding solution for German and Danish, used for improving search in Adobe S&P.
 Was responsible for Linguistic library in C++, which provided Spell check, User Dictionary and hyphenation services used by
products like InDesign, Illustrator.
 Wrote the keyword extraction engine for “Manthan”, which takes unstructured text as input and generated structured text in
form of keywords, categories and named entities.
 Enabled auto tagging of InDesign documents using keywords for better discoverability through XMP tags. This included
creating a search filter for windows for the InDesign document. The service was deployed on the AWS.
 Create a web application based on MVC for the demonstration purposes for various Text Analytics solutions.
STMicroelectronics, Greater Noida, India (Jan 2011 – Apr 2012)
System Engineer, Imaging Division
 Worked in a team of four to develop STV0978, an Image Signal Processor, which takes the raw image from the sensor, perform
various modifications like Noise Removal, Gamma Reduction, Exposure and Contrast settings to improve the quality of the
image before converting it to JPEG format.
Samsung Engineering Lab, Noida, India (June 2010 – Jan 2011)
Software Engineer, NXP
 Worked on NXP platform for mobiles as a part of Messaging team responsible for the SMS module in the mobile Software.
 Implemented Message Access Profile, a Bluetooth profile that supports exchange of messages between paired devices (e.g.
mobile and car screen). Reading, deleting and sending messages on the phone is possible through the head unit.
HONORS AND AWARDS





Awarded the ‘BRAVO’ award fixing critical Lilo bugs for Adobe CC 2013 Release.
Awarded “DFT” multiple times while in Adobe for focused work and contribution to wide variety of projects at the same time.
Received scholarship for four successive years for academic proficiency at NIT Kurukshetra.
Holder of KALPANA CHAWLA scholarship, awarded to the topmost rank holder (AIEEE, Engineering Entrance Exam) among
the girls from the state of Haryana studying at NIT Kurukshetra.

