MAHAK GARG
112 E. State St., Apt #3E, Ithaca, NY - 14850| Tel: +1(607)3795205|Email: mg2288@cornell.edu / mahakgrg@gmail.com

EDUCATION
Cornell University, Ithaca (Aug 2016– Present)
Master of Engineering, Computer Science
4.0 GPA
 Worked as a Consultant for the Cornell law school’s elastic search based legal text search project.
 Projects: As part of practicum designed a virtual minithread OS, which supports multiple threads with round robin multilevel
scheduling, TCP and UDP network communication and a Unix like file storage system.
National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra (Jul 2006– June 2010)
Bachelor of Technology, Computer Science and Engineering
9.56/10 CGPA
 Industrial Training: Successfully completed 8 weeks training at Agilent Technologies, Gurgaon where I worked on creating the
company’s intranet website using JSP technology.
 Academic Projects: Proposed an algorithm for “Self-Stabilizing Mobile Check pointing and Recovery” under the guidance of
A.K.Singh, Professor, NIT Kurukshetra. Implemented the solution on NS2 to prove the correctness of the algorithm.
SKILLS
C/C++, Java, Python, Amazon Web services, Eclipse, Microsoft Visual Studio, Xcode, Github, Perforce
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
Adobe Systems, Noida, India (Apr 2012 – July 2016)
Computer Scientist, Globalization and Text Analytics
 Led a team of three for a project that aimed at enabling Multi lingual search support in Adobe products like Stock, Behance,
Market etc. by providing Language specific elastic search settings and mappings. Developed customized elastic search plugins
to help aid the Multi lingual search.
 Was responsible for Linguistic library, Lilo, which provides Spell check, User Dictionary and hyphenation services used by
products like InDesign, Illustrator.
 Created a Text Analytics Engine called “Manthan”, which takes unstructured text as input and generates structured text in
form of keywords, categories and named entities.
 Enabled auto tagging of InDesign documents for better discoverability through XMP tags, this feature went for beta testing.
This included creating a search filter for windows for the InDesign document. The service was deployed on the AWS.
 Extended the Manthan project to take URL as input, the URL is then crawled, relevant text is extracted and fed to the engine
to generate structured information. All this was done in less than 50 ms per URL.
 Developed a DBpedia based Named Entity Recognition System to be consumed internally by Manthan.
 Implemented a de-compounding solution for German and Danish, using the open source Hunspell and Tex-Hyphen library.
 Created a lemmatizer solution for English, French and German languages based on Wiktionary data.
STMicroelectronics, Greater Noida, India (Jan 2011 – Apr 2012)
System Engineer, Imaging Division
 Worked in a team of four to develop STV0978, an Image Signal Processor, which takes the raw image from the sensor, perform
various modifications like Noise Removal, Gamma Reduction, Exposure and Contrast settings to improve the quality of the
image before converting it to JPEG format.
Samsung Engineering Lab, Noida, India (June 2010 – Jan 2011)
Software Engineer, NXP
 Worked on NXP platform for mobiles as a part of Messaging team responsible for the SMS module in the mobile Software.
 Implemented Message Access Profile, a Bluetooth profile that supports exchange of messages between paired devices (e.g.
mobile and car screen). Reading, deleting and sending messages on the phone is possible through the head unit.
HONORS AND AWARDS





Awarded the ‘BRAVO’ award for taking initiative and timely fixing critical Lilo bugs for Adobe CC 2013 Release.
Awarded “DFT” multiple times while in Adobe for focused work and contribution to wide variety of projects at the same time.
Received scholarship for four successive years for academic proficiency at NIT Kurukshetra.
Holder of KALPANA CHAWLA scholarship, awarded to the topmost rank holder (AIEEE, Engineering Entrance Exam) among
the girls from the state of Haryana studying at NIT Kurukshetra.
Languages Native – Hindi, Fluent – English | Interests Dancing, Badminton, Community volunteering and travelling.

